

===== PAGE 1 =====
ABM Protocol
Open camera or QR reader and
scan code to access this article
and other resources online.
Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Clinical Protocol #36:
The Mastitis Spectrum, Revised 2022
Katrina B. Mitchell,1 Helen M. Johnson,2 Juan Miguel Rodrı´guez,3 Anne Eglash,4
Charlotte Scherzinger,5 Irena Zakarija-Grkovic,6 Kyle Widmer Cash,7 Pamela Berens,8
Brooke Miller,9 and the Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine
Abstract
A central goal of the Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine is the development of clinical protocols for managing
common medical problems that may impact breastfeeding success. These protocols serve only as guidelines for the
care of breastfeeding mothers and infants and do not delineate an exclusive course of treatment or serve as standards
of medical care. Variations in treatment may be appropriate according to the needs of an individual patient. The
Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine recognizes that not all lactating individuals identify as women. Using gender-
inclusive language, however, is not possible in all languages and all countries and for all readers. The position of the
Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine (https://doi.org/10.1089/bfm.2021.29188.abm) is to interpret clinical protocols
within the framework of inclusivity of all breastfeeding, chestfeeding, and human milk-feeding individuals.
Keywords: abscess, breastfeeding, dysbiosis, engorgement, galactocele, lactation, mastitis, phlegmon
Introduction
M
astitis is a common maternal complication of lac-
tation and contributes to early cessation of breast-
feeding.1 In the past, mastitis has been regarded as a single
pathological entity in the lactating breast.2 However, scien-
tiﬁc evidence now demonstrates that mastitis encompasses a
spectrum of conditions resulting from ductal inﬂammation and
stromal edema (Fig. 1). If ductal narrowing and alveolar con-
gestion are worsened by overstimulation of milk production,
then inﬂammatory mastitis can develop, and acute bacterial
mastitis may follow (Fig. 2). This can progress to phlegmon or
abscess, particularly in the setting of tissue trauma from ag-
gressive breast massage. Galactoceles, which can result from
unresolved hyperlactation, can become infected. Subacute
mastitis occurs in the setting of chronic mammary dysbiosis,
with bacterial bioﬁlms narrowing ductal lumens.
The pathophysiology, diagnosis, and management of each
condition in the mastitis spectrum (ductal narrowing, inﬂam-
matory mastitis, bacterial mastitis, phlegmon, abscess, gal-
actocele, and subacute mastitis) will be discussed hereunder.
Early postpartum engorgement, a distinct condition that can
share some clinical features with mastitis spectrum disorders,
will also be reviewed.
Note that this protocol now replaces ABM Protocols #4,
Mastitis, and #20, Engorgement, which will both be re-
tired. ABM Protocols #32 (Management of Hyperlacta-
tion)3 and #35 (Supporting Breastfeeding During Maternal or
Child Hospitalization)4 may serve as useful adjuncts to this
protocol.
1Department of Breast Surgery, Ridley-Tree Cancer Center, Sansum Clinic, Santa Barbara, California, USA.
2Department of Surgery, East Carolina University Brody School of Medicine, Greenville, North Carolina, USA.
3Department of Nutrition and Food Science, Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
4Department of Family Medicine and Community Health, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison,
Wisconsin, USA.
5Department of Gynaecology and Obstetrics at Klinikum Forchheim, Forchheim, Germany.
6Department of Clinical Skills, University of Split School of Medicine, Split, Croatia.
7Department of Medicine, Tulane University School of Medicine, Southeast, Louisiana Veterans Health Care System, New Orleans,
Louisiana, USA.
8Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Texas, Houston, Texas, USA.
9Department of Family Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
BREASTFEEDING MEDICINE
Volume 17, Number 5, 2022
ª Mary Ann Liebert, Inc.
DOI: 10.1089/bfm.2022.29207.kbm
360


===== PAGE 2 =====
Key Information: Pathophysiology of Mastitis
Spectrum Conditions
General principles
Mastitis is inﬂammation of the mammary gland that most
often presents in a segmental distribution of ducts, alveoli,
and surrounding connective tissue (Fig. 3). Ductal lumens
can be narrowed by edema and hyperemia associated with
hyperlactation as well as mammary dysbiosis5 (Fig. 2).
Mammary dysbiosis, or disruption of the milk microbiome,
results from a complex interplay of factors, including ma-
ternal genetics and medical conditions, exposure to antibi-
otics, use of probiotics, regular use of breast pumps, and
Cesarean births.6
Basic science research has demonstrated that multiple fac-
tors contribute to the development of mastitis (Fig. 4).6 These
include host factors such as hyperlactation, microbial factors
such as diversity of the milk microbiome, and medical factors
such as antibiotic and probiotic use. Milk stasis has been
postulated to be a potential instigating factor for mastitis,
although scientiﬁc evidence has not proven a causation. No
evidence exists that speciﬁc foods cause mastitis, although
dietary choices may reﬂect the underlying health and micro-
biome of an individual. The lactating breast is a dynamic gland
that responds to internal and external hormonal stimulation.
Compared with a static repository such as the urinary blad-
der, the breast requires feedback inhibition to regulate milk
production. Reducing milk removal may transiently increase
pain and erythema from alveolar distention and vascular con-
gestion; however, it ultimately prevents future episodes as
feedback inhibitor of lactation (FIL) and other regulatory hor-
mones activate and decrease milk production.7 Mothers who
experience persistent high milk production despite eliminating
iatrogenic causes of excessive milk removal may require ad-
ditional pharmacological treatment of hyperlactation.3 These
concepts will be expanded upon throughout this protocol.
FIG. 2.
Compared with a healthy lactiferous duct (A), ductal inﬂammation can result in narrowed lumens, stromal edema,
dysbiosis, nipple bleb formation, and mastitis (B).
FIG. 1.
Spectrum of inﬂammatory conditions in the lac-
tating breast.
ABM PROTOCOL
361


===== PAGE 3 =====
Engorgement
Some symptoms of early postpartum engorgement may be
similar to those of ductal narrowing and early inﬂammatory
mastitis. However, postpartum engorgement that results from
secretory activation (lactogenesis II) is a distinct clinical
entity related to interstitial edema and hyperemia (Fig. 5).
It presents as bilateral breast pain, ﬁrmness, and swelling
that usually occurs between days 3 and 5 postpartum.8 Onset
may be as late as 9–10 days, although this is less common
in multiparous mothers.8 Cesarean birth is associated with
delayed lactogenesis II and, therefore, delayed presentation
FIG. 3.
Right breast upper inner
quadrant mastitis with ultrasound
showing
hyperemia
and
edema
without ﬂuid collection.
FIG. 4.
Factors that may play a role in the composition of the human milk microbiota and in protecting or predisposing to
mastitis.
362
ABM PROTOCOL


===== PAGE 4 =====
of engorgement.9 If engorgement is managed appropriately,
it should not progress to other conditions on the mastitis
spectrum such as bacterial mastitis, phlegmon, or galactocele.
Ductal narrowing (e.g., ‘‘plugging’’)
‘‘Plugging’’ is a colloquial term for microscopic ductal
inﬂammation and narrowing (Fig. 2) that is related to alveolar
distension and/or mammary dysbiosis.
Ducts in the breast are innumerable and interlacing
(Figs. 6–8) and it is not physiologically or anatomically pos-
sible for a single duct to become obstructed with a macro-
scopic milk ‘‘plug.’’ It should be noted that ultrasound studies
documenting a small number of oriﬁces approaching the
nipple10 reﬂect limitations of radiographic images as com-
pared with histological anatomy.
Ductal narrowing presents as a focal area of induration or
more globally congested breast tissue that is tender. It may be
mildly erythematous from lymphatic congestion and alveolar
edema, and does not have associated systemic symptoms
(Fig. 9). This may resolve spontaneously, but patients can
experience transient residual pain. Patients may feel relief
of a ‘‘plug’’ with breastfeeding because this decreases alve-
olar distension. However, repeated feeding in an attempt
to relieve the ‘‘plug’’ will suppress FIL, increase milk pro-
duction, and ultimately exacerbate inﬂammation and ductal
narrowing. Therefore, physiological breastfeeding and anti-
inﬂammatory measures as described hereunder are most
efﬁcacious. Attempts to extrude a ‘‘plug’’ or milk precipitate
by squeezing or aggressively massaging the breast are inef-
fective and result in tissue trauma.
Inﬂammatory mastitis
When ductal narrowing persists or worsens and surround-
ing inﬂammation progresses, inﬂammatory mastitis develops.
Inﬂammatory mastitis presents as an increasingly erythem-
atous, edematous, and painful region of the breast (Fig. 10)
with systemic signs and symptoms such as fever, chills, and
tachycardia. It should be emphasized that systemic inﬂam-
matory response syndrome may occur in the absence of
infection.
Bacterial mastitis
Bacterial mastitis represents a progression from ductal
narrowing and inﬂammatory mastitis to an entity necessi-
tating antibiotics or probiotics to resolve. Common organ-
isms in lactational mastitis include Staphylococcus (e.g.,
S. aureus, S. epidermidis, S. lugdunensis, and S. hominis) and
Streptococcus (e.g., S. mitis, S. salivarius, S. pyogenes, and
S. agalactiae). Despite the common perception that yeasts
cause ‘‘candida mastitis,’’ no scientiﬁc evidence exists to
support this diagnosis and sterilization of pump parts or infant
toys is not recommended to ‘‘eradicate’’ yeast.5,11
Bacterial mastitis is not a contagious entity and does not
pose a risk to the infant nor require an interruption in
breastfeeding. There is no evidence to support poor hygiene
as a cause of bacterial mastitis or the need for routine ster-
ilization of pumps. Handwashing before milk expression and
basic pump cleaning practices should be followed.
Although nipple trauma is associated with mastitis, the
data are limited by confounding and bias.1 New evidence
about the composition of the human milk microbiome dem-
onstrates that mastitis is not caused by retrograde spread of
pathogenic bacteria from visible nipple trauma, as bacteria
and fungi identiﬁed on the nipple-areolar-complex in the
presence of nipple pain and damage are regularly identiﬁed
in healthy human milk microbiomes.12 Infection may not
occur in the event of a low concentration of the pathogen,
presence of nonvirulent or weakly virulent strains, presence
of a competitive microbiota, or adequate immunological and
nutritional status of the host.13 Therefore, two patients who
host the same pathogen may express different levels of
symptomatology.
Bacterial mastitis presents as cellulitis (worsening ery-
thema and induration) in a speciﬁc region of the breast that
may spread to different quadrants (Fig. 11). An evaluation
by a medical professional should be performed if there are
persistent systemic symptoms (>24 hours) such as fever and
tachycardia. In the absence of systemic signs and symptoms,
diagnosis should be considered if the breast is not responding
to conservative measures described hereunder. Laboratory
FIG. 5.
Day 5 postpartum breast engorgement showing
edematous nipple areolar complex and dependent lymphe-
dema with overlying erythema.
FIG. 6.
Cross section of nipple areolar complex with ar-
rows demonstrating extremely small interlacing ducts in the
retroareolar region.
ABM PROTOCOL
363


===== PAGE 5 =====
testing such as C-reactive protein or a white blood cell count
are of limited utility in diagnosing bacterial mastitis as these
are markers of inﬂammation and not speciﬁc for infection.
Phlegmon
Phlegmons are heterogeneous, complex, and ill-deﬁned
ﬂuid collections that can occur throughout the body in the
setting of inﬂammation. Excessive deep tissue massage in the
setting of ductal narrowing and inﬂammatory mastitis may
propagate phlegmon formation because deep massage
potentiates worsened edema and microvascular injury.14
Phlegmon should be suspected with a history of mastitis
that worsens into a ﬁrm, mass-like area without ﬂuctuance
(Fig. 12). It can be conﬁrmed on ultrasound (Fig. 12).
Abscess
Lactational abscesses represent a progression from bacte-
rial mastitis or phlegmon to an infected ﬂuid collection that
necessitates drainage. Approximately 3–11% of women with
acute mastitis will develop an abscess.15
Abscess presents as a progressive induration and erythema,
and often a palpable ﬂuid collection in a well-deﬁned area of
the breast (Fig. 13).16 The initial systemic symptoms and
FIG. 7.
Histology image demon-
strating
functional
lobular
units
with small central duct, surround-
ing fat, and ﬁbrous stroma (con-
nective tissue).
FIG. 8.
Histology image demon-
strating innumerable small ducts
draining into larger ductal systems
that have complex architecture.
364
ABM PROTOCOL


===== PAGE 6 =====
fever may resolve as the body walls off the infectious pro-
cess, or may resolve and then recur. Alternatively, symptoms
may continue to worsen until the infected ﬂuid collection
is drained. Although the diagnosis of abscess is often made by
history and clinical examination, ultrasound also may be
utilized (Fig. 14).17
Galactocele and infected galactocele
A galactocele develops when ductal narrowing obstructs
the ﬂow of milk to the extent that a signiﬁcant volume of
obstructed milk collects in a cyst-like cavity.18 Galactoceles
can range in size from small (1–2 cm) to very large (>10 cm).
Galactoceles present as a moderately ﬁrm mass that
gradually or rapidly increases in size over time. The size may
ﬂuctuate throughout the day, with a temporary decrease after
breastfeeding. It may be uncomfortable, but is generally not
as overtly painful as an abscess and does not have associated
erythema or systemic symptoms unless it becomes infected
(Fig. 15). Ultrasound will show a simple or loculated cystic
ﬂuid collection (Fig. 16). On occasion, image-guided aspi-
ration may be utilized to conﬁrm the diagnosis.
Recurrent mastitis
There is no consensus on the deﬁnition of recurrent mas-
titis. Patients may describe having mastitis symptoms such as
fever, breast redness, breast swelling, and/or breast pain that
occur every 2–4 weeks, or less often. Risk factors include
waxing and waning episodes of hyperlactation, dysbiosis,
inadequate treatment of prior mastitis, and failure to address
the underlying etiology of prior episodes.
Subacute mastitis
Subacute mastitis occurs when ductal lumens become nar-
rowed by bacterial bioﬁlms in the setting of chronic mammary
dysbiosis.5 Dysbiosis is deﬁned as changes in the quantitative
and qualitative composition of a host microbiome that con-
tributetoinﬂammatory diseasebothacutely andchronically.As
in other organs, when the mammary microbiome loses bacterial
diversity and the number of anti-inﬂammatory organisms de-
clines, an increase in pathogenic bacteria occurs.19,20
Under physiological conditions, coagulase-negative Sta-
phylococci (CoNS) and viridans Streptococci (i.e., S. mitis
and S. salivarius) form thin bioﬁlms that line the epithelium
of the mammary ducts, allowing a normal milk ﬂow.21 In the
setting of dysbiosis, these species proliferate and function
under opportunistic circumstances whereby they are able to
form thick bioﬁlms inside the ducts, inﬂaming the mammary
epithelium and forcing milk to pass through an increasingly
narrower lumen (Fig. 17). CoNS and viridans Streptococci
do not produce toxins responsible for acute bacterial masti-
tis; therefore, systemic symptoms are uncommon and local
breast symptoms are milder than in acute mastitis.
With subacute mastitis, patients may report a history of
previously treated acute bacterial mastitis. Other pertinent
history includes Cesarean birth, exclusive pumping, nip-
ple shield use, and other circumstances that alter the milk
microbiome.6 Patients may have needle-like, burning breast
pain, nipple blebs, recurrent areas of induration or congestion,
and may have unresolved hyperlactation.22 Sterile milk cul-
ture and sensitivities can be performed23 as noted hereunder.
Recommendations
For each recommendation, the quality of evidence (levels
of evidence 1, 2, and 3) and the strength of recommendation
(A, B, and C) are noted as deﬁned by the strength of rec-
ommendation taxonomy criteria.24
Management of mastitis spectrum disorders includes
general strategies that apply to the entire spectrum, as well as
condition-speciﬁc interventions. Prompt and effective treat-
ment will halt progression in the spectrum. Many of these
measures provide not only treatment, but prevention as well.
Spectrum-wide management strategies will be delineated
ﬁrst, followed by speciﬁc recommendations for particular
FIG. 9.
Patient with unilateral left breast ‘‘plug’’ in upper
outer quadrant who worsened milk obstruction by repeat-
edly pumping.
FIG. 10.
Patient with early in-
ﬂammatory
mastitis.
Lymphatic
congestion is noted by arrow. The
patient was treated with ice, ibu-
profen, acetaminophen, and feed-
ing ﬁrst off the left, less congested
breast ﬁrst to avoid overstimulation
of the affected right breast. The
patient’s symptoms resolved within
48 hours.
ABM PROTOCOL
365


===== PAGE 7 =====
conditions (ductal narrowing, inﬂammatory mastitis, bacterial
mastitis, phlegmon, abscess, galactocele, subacute mastitis,
and recurrent mastitis). Recommendations for management of
early postpartum engorgement are also included hereunder.
Spectrum-wide recommendations
1. Anticipatory guidance and behavioral interventions
a. Reassure mothers that many mastitis symptoms will
resolve with conservative care and psychosocial sup-
port.
A Swedish study noted that most women with in-
ﬂammatory mastitis had complete resolution of
symptoms without need for antibiotics or other inter-
ventions. The authors attributed this ﬁnding to a focus
on symptomatic control, appreciation of the physio-
logical anti-inﬂammatory response, and regular com-
munication between patient and clinician25 (Fig. 10).
Support patients in continuation of breastfeeding and
ascertain what resources they may need to prevent
early weaning. Assist mothers in identifying ways to
decrease stress, increase opportunities to rest, and help
resolve early signs of inﬂammatory mastitis. Fourth-
trimester care programs represent a holistic approach
to postpartum care, including mental health, psycho-
social needs, and breastfeeding counseling.26
Level of evidence: 3. Strength of recommendation: C.
b. Educate patients on normal breast anatomy and
postpartum physiology in lactation.
Many patients experience breast fullness or palpate
normal lactational glandular tissue and misinterpret
this as ‘‘plugging.’’ They should be reassured that
lactating breasts can feel ‘‘lumpy’’ and even painful at
times. Although this is uncomfortable, it is not ab-
normal. Patients should be educated about early
postpartum hormonal shifts and a low estrogen state
that predisposes patients to sweating and hot ﬂashes
that may mimic fevers. In addition, patients should be
reassured that infection does not develop in the period
of several hours. The pain and redness they may ex-
perience in mornings after a long stretch of sleep
represents alveolar distention, edema, and inﬂamma-
tion rather than infection.
Level of evidence: 3. Strength of recommendation: C.
c. Feed the infant on demand, and do not aim to
‘‘empty’’ breasts.
FIG. 12.
Clinical appearance of
left breast upper inner quadrant
phlegmon. Ultrasound showing in-
distinct ﬂuid collection with sur-
rounding hyperemia and edema.
FIG. 11.
Bacterial mastitis that progressed from early
inﬂammation in the inner quadrant to all quadrants being
affected. This patient also pumped and continually fed the
infant on the right breast in an attempt to prevent ‘‘milk
stasis.’’ This approach resulted in worsened ductal inﬂam-
mation and bacterial overgrowth as well as milk obstruction.
366
ABM PROTOCOL


===== PAGE 8 =====
Milk volume depends on a feedback mechanism
whereby increased milk removal increases produc-
tion.7 Overfeeding from the affected breast or
‘‘pumping to empty’’ perpetuates a cycle of hy-
perlactation and is a major risk factor for worsening
tissue edema and inﬂammation (Fig. 18). Mothers can
hand express small volumes of milk for comfort until
their milk production downregulates to match the
infant’s needs.27 Mothers using breast pumps should
express only the volume their infant consumes.
In some instances, in which the retroareolar region
is so edematous and inﬂamed that no milk is ex-
pressible by infant breastfeeding or hand expres-
sion, the mother should not continue to attempt
feeding from the affected breast during the acute
phase (Fig. 19). She can feed from the contralateral
breast and return to feeding from the affected breast
when edema and inﬂammation subsides. Edema
may resolve more quickly with ice and lymphatic
drainage. She should be counseled that a decrease in
milk production is expected, but can later be aug-
mented.
No evidence exists to support ‘‘dangle feeding’’
(i.e., feeding an infant on the ﬂoor with the mother
hovering above) or other unsafe infant positions.
Patients may consider safe variations on standard
feeding positions, with the understanding that this
may improve comfort. However, this does not ad-
dress underlying inﬂammation.
Levels of evidence: 2–3. Strength of recommendation:
C.
d. Minimize breast pump usage.
Mechanical breast pumps stimulate breast milk pro-
duction without physiologically extracting milk as an
infant will. Pumping does not provide the opportu-
nity for bacterial exchange between the infant’s mouth
and mother’s breast, and may, therefore, predispose to
dysbiosis.6 Breast pumps also can cause trauma to
breast parenchyma and the nipple areolar complex if
improper ﬂange sizes are used, suction is too high,
or the mother is pumping for an excessive duration
of time. Milk expression should be limited to when
mother is separated from her infant or requires pump-
ing for other medically indicated reasons for herself or
her infant. Women should not be instructed to express
and discard their milk, as bacterial mastitis is not a
contraindication to breastfeeding. Women using a
breast pump should express milk at a frequency and
volume that mimics physiological breastfeeding.
Levels of evidence: 2–3. Strength of recommendation:
C.
e. Avoid the use of nipple shields.
Available evidence does not support the use of
nipple shields. Neither safety nor effectiveness has
been demonstrated. Similar to pumping, nipple
FIG. 14.
Ultrasound image showing ﬂuid collection
(black) with needle entering (white).
FIG. 13.
Patient with right breast
upper outer quadrant abscess who
underwent
ofﬁce
drainage
with
Penrose drain stent that was re-
moved after 3 days. At 1 week
follow-up, the right breast was re-
solved and the 1 mm stab incision
site closed.
ABM PROTOCOL
367


===== PAGE 9 =====
shields represent nonphysiological breastfeeding
and result in inadequate breast milk extraction.28
Infants often passively drink milk from the shield
repository without latching to the parenchyma of
the breast.
Level of evidence: 3. Strength of recommendation:
C.
f. Wear an appropriately ﬁtting supportive bra.
Lactating breasts are highly vascular and require
support to avoid dependent lymphedema as well as
progressive back and neck pain.
Level of evidence: 3. Strength of recommendation:
C.
g. Avoid deep massage of the lactating breast.
Deep massage causes increased inﬂammation, tissue
edema, and microvascular injury. Avoid electric
toothbrushes and other commercial vibrating or
massaging devices. A systematic review concluded
that although breast massage may reduce pain, it
should not be recommended as standard of care
because it requires extensive training to master
atraumatic approach.29 The most successful tech-
nique approximates manual lymphatic drainage
with light sweeping of the skin rather than deep
tissue massage.30,31 It should be noted that gentle
compressions during breast pump usage, often
termed ‘‘hands on pumping,’’ provide an effect
similar to hand expression and is safe if excessive
manual force is avoided.
Levels of evidence: 1–2. Strength of recommenda-
tion: B.
h. Avoid saline soaks, castor oil, and other topical
products.
Mastitis is inﬂammation and/or infection in a deep
organ space, and should be managed as such.
Topical products such as castor oil will not treat
this condition and may in fact cause tissue dam-
age32 particularly if they are combined with
massage.14 Silicone breast pumps ﬁlled with Ep-
som salt can macerate skin33 and further contrib-
ute to localized hyperemia and edema, and should
be avoided. Published evidence and best practice
for general wound care do not support the use of
saline soaking for pain or nipple trauma. Princi-
ples of wound management include handling tis-
sue delicately to minimize further trauma and
consideration of ointments and dermal matrices to
enhance wound closure.33
Level of evidence: 3. Strength of recommendation:
C.
i. Avoid routine sterilization of pumps and household
items.
Mastitis is not contagious and does not result from
unhygienic
practices.
Pump
parts
should
be
cleaned appropriately after each use, but routine
sterilization of pumps and other household items
is not necessary to prevent mastitis.34 Avoid
cleaning of nipple as this may cause skin macer-
ation and pain. Ascending infection is not sup-
ported by the highly vascular nature of nipple
physiology and anatomy.35 Similar to other open
sites of trauma in the body (e.g., tracheostomies
and gastric tube entrance sites), external commu-
nication prevents deep tissue infection rather than
promotes it.
FIG. 16.
Mammogram showing
galactocele adjacent to nipple are-
olar
complex
and
ultrasound
showing septation within galacto-
cele.
FIG. 15.
Galactocele that was repeatedly drained with a
needle and subsequently became infected.
368
ABM PROTOCOL


===== PAGE 10 =====
Level of evidence: 3. Strength of recommendation:
C.
2. Medical interventions
a. Decrease inﬂammation and pain.
Ice
and
nonsteroidal
anti-inﬂammatory
drugs
(NSAIDs) can reduce edema and inﬂammation
and provide symptomatic relief (Figs. 10 and 19),
and acetaminophen/paracetamol can provide anal-
gesia.36 For example, ice can be applied every hour
or more frequently if desired. Ibuprofen can be
dosed 800 mg every 8 hours37 and acetamino-
phen/paracetamol 1,000 mg every 8 hours38 in the
acute setting.
Although heat will vasodilate and may worsen
symptoms, it also may provide comfort for some
patients.39 The use of warm showers and antipy-
retics did not improve mastitis outcomes in a ran-
domized controlled trial.25
Sunﬂower or soy lecithin 5–10 g daily by mouth
may be taken to reduce inﬂammation in ducts and
emulsify milk.22,40
Levels of evidence: 1–3. Strength of recommenda-
tion: C.
b. Treat associated nipple blebs and avoid unrooﬁng.
If a nipple bleb, which represents ductal inﬂam-
matory cells propagating to the surface and lodging
(Figs. 2 and 20), is present, do not unroof the bleb as
this will cause trauma and further luminal narrow-
ing. Oral lecithin and application of a topical
moderate potency steroid cream such as 0.1% tri-
amcinolone may be used to reduce inﬂammation on
the surface of the nipple.22 This is safe with
breastfeeding and can be wiped off with a tissue or
towel before feeding the infant.41
Levels of evidence: 2–3. Strength of recommenda-
tions: C.
c. Treat hyperlactation, or breast milk ‘‘oversupply.’’
Hyperlactation
predisposes
patients
to
luminal
congestion and inﬂammation, which in turn facili-
tates mammary dysbiosis. This may potentiate a
vicious cycle, as dysbiosis is a cause of ductal
narrowing and inﬂammation. See ABM Protocol 32,
Management of Hyperlactation.3
Level of evidence: 2. Strength of recommendation:
C.
FIG. 18.
Patient with history of
right breast mastitis who was in-
structed to pump every 2 hours to
‘‘keep the breast empty.’’ This re-
sulted in severe upregulation of
milk production in her right breast
and a continued cycle of mastitis.
After being instructed to feed from
the less full (left) breast ﬁrst, she
downregulated the right breast and
experienced no recurrent episodes
of mastitis.
FIG. 17.
Electron microscopy showing normal mam-
mary ducts compared with mammary ducts with bioﬁlm
formation.
ABM PROTOCOL
369


===== PAGE 11 =====
d. Utilize therapeutic ultrasound.
Therapeutic ultrasound, or TUS, uses thermal energy
to reduce inﬂammation and relieve edema. TUS may
be an effective treatment for conditions arising in the
mastitis spectrum.42 TUS can be performed under the
supervision of a trained physician or physiotherapist
on a daily basis until relief is achieved. The breast
treatment setting is 1 MHz, intensity 2.0 W/cm2 for
5 minutes.43 If a patient has persistent symptoms
despite several days of treatment, health care pro-
viders should consider additional investigations.
Levelsofevidence: 2–3.Strengthofrecommendation:
C.
e. Reserve antibiotics for bacterial mastitis.
Use of antibiotics for inﬂammatory mastitis disrupts
the breast microbiome and increases the risk of
progression
to
bacterial
mastitis.
Furthermore,
nonselective use of antibiotics promotes develop-
ment of resistant pathogens. Prophylactic antibiotics
have not been shown to be effective in the pre-
vention of mastitis.44 It should be noted that many
antibiotics and antifungal medications have anti-
inﬂammatory properties, and this may explain why
women experience relief when taking these.
Level of evidence: 2. Strength of recommendation:
B.
f. Consider probiotics.
Data regarding probiotics are mixed.44–47 A sys-
tematic review suggested that probiotics may be
effective for both treatment and prevention of mas-
titis, but a strong recommendation could not be
made due to limitations of the studied trials.47 If
FIG. 20.
Examples of different
presentations of nipple blebs.
FIG. 19.
Ducts can become
narrowed secondary to alve-
olar distention and conges-
ted vessels and lymphatics.
Ice and decreased removal
of breast milk reduce duc-
tal
narrowing
and
breast
swelling.
370
ABM PROTOCOL


===== PAGE 12 =====
utilized, the probiotic should contain Limosilacto-
bacillus fermentum (formerly classiﬁed as Lactoba-
cillus fermentum) or, preferably, Ligilactobacillus
salivarius (formerly classiﬁed as Lactobacillus sal-
ivarius) strains.48,49 Note that only selected strains
of these bacterial species may be effective against
mastitis pathogens. Therefore, clinical trial out-
comes cannot be generalized to an entire species in
the same way that antibiotics may be efﬁcacious
against one strain of a pathological bacteria but not
another.
Levelsofevidence: 1–2.Strengthofrecommendation:
B.
g. Evaluate for perinatal mood and anxiety disorders
(PMADs).
Women with a history of anxiety and depression
experience higher rates of mastitis symptoms,50 and
PMADs are increased in any patient experiencing
breastfeeding complications. Although any clini-
cians contacting postpartum patients should screen
for PMADs,26 particular attention should be paid to
patients feeling defeated and/or withdrawn as a
result of challenges with breastfeeding. Further-
more, patients who express signiﬁcant worry about
potential recurrence and are unable to stop pumping
despite recommendations may be suffering from
anxiety. Extreme pain out of proportion to exam
may also point to alterations in sensitivity to stim-
ulation as a result of PMADs and, therefore, should
be considered in the differential diagnosis.51 Care-
ful exploration of Dysphoric Milk Ejection Reﬂex
and/or nursing aversion may also be warranted if
the patient does not report traditional symptoms of
PMADs.52
Level of evidence: 3. Strength of recommendation: C.
Condition-speciﬁc recommendations
a. Recommendations for postpartum engorgement in
lactogenesis II
 Minimize intravenous ﬂuids during labor, as inter-
stitial ﬂuid accumulation exacerbates edema and
engorgement.53
 Promote
‘‘rooming
in’’
to
allow
physiological
breastfeeding and avoidance of pumping.54
 Instruct mothers on hand expression to relieve
symptoms and provide breast milk for infants who
may not transfer milk effectively or are separated
from their mothers.55
 Perform reverse pressure softening of the areola,56
and manual pump or hand expression to remove
small volumes of milk before infant latch and facil-
itate physiological milk transfer.
FIG. 21.
Technique of lymphatic drainage.
ABM PROTOCOL
371


===== PAGE 13 =====
 Consider lymphatic drainage to alleviate interstitial
edema31 (Fig. 21).
 Consider ice for symptomatic relief. Studies have not
demonstrated cabbage leaves to be more effective
than ice,57 suggesting that the therapeutic beneﬁt is
related to vasoconstriction from cold rather than a
property of cabbage itself. Importantly, cabbage may
carry Listeria bacteria.
Levels of evidence: 2–3. Strength of recommenda-
tions: B–C.
b. Recommendations for ductal narrowing and inﬂam-
matory mastitis
 Follow spectrum-wide recommendations mentioned
earlier.
c. Recommendations for bacterial mastitis
 Antibiotic selection, dosage, and duration for bacte-
rial mastitis are outlined in Box 1.
 It is safe for children to consume milk from a breast
with bacterial mastitis.58
 Routine hospital admission and IV antibiotics are not
necessary unless known multidrug-resistant organ-
ism (MDRO) or clinical presentation mandates (e.g.,
evidence of severe sepsis and inability to tolerate
oral medication or ﬂuid). Of note, some MDRO may
be treatable using oral antibiotics. Antibiotic choice
should be driven by culture data or local anti-
biogram. If hospital admission is necessary, mother
and infant should be kept rooming in together and
allowed to continue to breastfeed on demand. ABM
Protocol #35, Supporting Breastfeeding During Ma-
ternal or Child Hospitalization, refers to other rec-
ommendations in detail.4
 Consider intravenous ﬂuid administration if patient’s
oral intake of ﬂuids is suboptimal as this may alle-
viate tachycardia and improve symptomatology.
 If there is no symptomatic improvement after 48
hours of ﬁrst-line therapy, consider a milk culture to
evaluate for resistant and/or less common pathogens
such as methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus
(MRSA).58 Consider local susceptibility and resis-
tance patterns and proceed to empiric therapy. Other
situations in which to consider early milk culture
include mothers expressing breast milk for an im-
munocompromised infant in the neonatal intensive
care unit, health care workers in areas with a high
prevalence of MRSA, and patients with recurrent
infections.
 Data regarding the roleof probiotics in bacterial mastitis
continue to emerge. Probiotics have been shown not to
alter composition of human milk microbiome.44–47
Levels of evidence: 2–3. Strength of recommenda-
tions: C.
d. Recommendations for phlegmon
 Lactational phlegmon may require extended antibi-
otics for complete resolution, but cases should be
considered individually.14
 A phlegmon may coalesce into a drainable abscess
and, therefore, patients should be followed carefully
for this development. Interval examination and im-
aging is warranted until complete resolution.14
Level of evidence: 2. Strength of recommendations:
C.
FIG. 22.
Options for drainage of
lactational ﬂuid collections.
Box 1. Empiric Antibiotic Management58,74
First line
 Dicloxacillin or ﬂucloxacillin 500 mg QID for 10–14
days
 Where dicloxacillin and ﬂucloxacillin are not available,
cloxacillin can be used alternatively; however, oral
bioavailability is more variable with cloxacillin.75 All
drugs have low Relative Infant Dose of the drug.76
Cephalexin 500 mg QID for 10–14 days
 Broader coverage including gram negative rods; does
not need to be taken separately from meals
Second line
 Clindamycin 300 mg four times daily for 10–14 days
 Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole DS BID for 10–14
days
B Not recommended for mothers of children with
G6PD deﬁciency. Use with caution in mothers with
premature infants or infants with
hyperbilirubinemia, especially under 30 days old.77
372
ABM PROTOCOL


===== PAGE 14 =====
e. Recommendations for abscess
 Drain the abscess to achieve source control. Needle
aspiration with ﬂuid culture and sensitivity is often
recommended as the ﬁrst-line intervention for lacta-
tional abscess.59 However, patients most often require
recurrentaspirationsfor deﬁnitiveresolution.Repeated
aspirations may be stressful and discouraging for the
patient, and risk breastfeeding discontinuation.60–62
 Drain placement as the initial intervention should
be considered for deﬁnitive management at the
time of the index procedure. Ofﬁce drainage is
demonstrated in published videos63,64 and illus-
trated in Figure 13. Patients also can be referred to
interventional
radiology
for
drain
placement.
Drains or skin stents should be placed to gravity
rather than suction (Fig. 22). If formal drain is not
available, adaptations using supplies such as Foley
catheters or glove ﬁngers can be used based on
local resources. Strictly avoid vacuum-assisted
wound devices on a lactating breast.
 After aspiration or drain placement, mothers should
continue breastfeeding from the affected breast. Milk
ﬁstula rate is <2%, but lactation must be managed
appropriately and hyperlactation treated if present.65
 Antibiotic duration is commonly 10–14 days58;
however, a shorter course may be appropriate if there
is rapid resolution of surrounding cellulitis.
 Tissue inﬂammation and phlegmonous changes may
take several weeks to resolve and patients may feel
the presence of a small mass-like area. They should
undergo interval examination and imaging to ensure
resolution.14
Levels of evidence: 2–3. Strength of recommenda-
tions: C.
f.
Recommendations
for
galactocele
and
infected
galactocele
 For
symptomatic
galactoceles,
drainage
is
recommended for symptom relief, conﬁrmation of
diagnosis, and to decrease mass effect to facilitate
latch. Aspiration almost always results in incomplete
drainage and/or recurrence, and repeated aspirations
risk converting a sterile galactocele into an infected
galactocele. Therefore, drain placement as described
earlier is recommended.
 An infected galactocele requires drainage as well as
antibiotics (Fig. 15).66
Level of evidence: 3. Strength of recommendations:
C.
g. Recommendations for recurrent mastitis
 Examine patients and obtain milk culture to establish a
diagnosis of true recurrent mastitis, rather than treating
empirically. Breast milk culture23 (Box 2) can identify
and provide sensitivities of uncommon pathogens and
resistantbacteria.Forexample,althoughCoNSarecom-
monly present in breast milk, they have also been
identiﬁed as opportunistic pathogens in mastitis.67
MRSA and resistant CoNS will not respond to typical
antibiotics used for acute mastitis such as dicloxacillin
or cephalexin.
 Ensure resolution of bacterial mastitis, as earlier,
with follow-up examination of patients.
 Evaluate breastfeeding and/or pumping for potential
risk factors for mastitis (e.g., excessive massage and
unnecessary pumping).
 Consider daily probiotic use with L. fermentum or,
preferably, L. salivarius for prevention,48,49 recog-
nizing the limitations of different strains of the same
species having different efﬁcacies.
 Prophylactic antibiotics have not been shown to be
effective in the prevention of mastitis and may select
antibiotic-resistant strains.44
 Multiple recurrences in the same location warrants radi-
ology evaluation to rule out an underlying mass or other
abnormality such as granulomatous mastitis.68 Inﬂam-
matory breast cancer is an aggressive subtype of malig-
nant tumors that presents with progressive erythema,
breast retraction, and peau d’orange appearance of the
breast. Any concern for inﬂammatory breast cancer war-
rants urgent referral to breast surgery and oncology.69
Levels of evidence: 1–3. Strength of recommenda-
tions: B–C.
h. Recommendations for subacute mastitis
 Individual mammary microbiomes have different
environmental thresholds at which opportunistic
bacterial pathogens become symptomatic. Further,
milk culture may not grow a dominant organism.
Therefore, treatment should be individualized based
on clinical history and level of suspicion for subacute
mastitis.70,71 Antibiotics in the macrolide class may
have the best efﬁcacy in this clinical scenario due to
the intracellular mechanism of action, though more
studies are needed.72
 Probiotics containing L. salivarius or L. fermentum
strains represent a treatment option, although more
studies are required.48,49
Levels of evidence: 2–3. Strength of recommenda-
tions: B–C.
Summary
Overall, conditions occurring in the mastitis pathophysi-
ological spectrum can be prevented and treated by reducing
iatrogenic interventions and utilizing simple management
principles such as ice, NSAIDs, and physiological breast-
feeding. Attention should be given to appropriate treatment
Box 2. How to Perform a Sterile Breast
Milk Culture
1. Clean the nipple and areola: Both a topical antiseptic
solution and washing with warm water and soap with
air-drying have been proposed. There are no data to
determine which is better to remove skin ﬂora while
preserving the integrity of the nipple and areolar skin.
2. Use sterile gloves to express milk.
3. Collect 5–10 mL milk in a sterile container.
4. No contact should be made between nipple and sterile
container.
5. Send as ‘‘body ﬂuid culture’’ rather than ‘‘wound
culture.’’
ABM PROTOCOL
373


===== PAGE 15 =====
of hyperlactation as an primary underlying risk factor for
mastitis. Similarly, given the importance of a healthy breast
milk microbiome in preventing mastitis, risk factors for dys-
biosis should be addressed. Understanding the pathophysi-
ology of ductal narrowing and inﬂammation allows clinicians
to select targeted effective treatments for mastitis.
Traditional recommendations to augment milk removal to
counteract milk stasis and to massage breast tissue to relieve
ductal obstruction from milk ‘‘plugs’’ lack physiological
validity. Frequent stimulation of breasts with congested al-
veolar cells worsens hyperemia and edema, causing increa-
sed pain, swelling, and redness. This not only worsens pain
and edema, but also decreases the ability of an infant to obtain
an atraumatic latch and effectively withdraw milk from the
breast. Frequent pumping also disrupts the milk microbiome,
potentiating the development of mammary dysbiosis and
increasing the risk for bacterial mastitis. In addition, massage
of the mammary gland causes capillary injury and tissue
necrosis, and is a primary risk factor for phlegmon and
abscess development.
Areas for Future Research
Clinical studies on mastitis and related disorders are lim-
ited by study design and confounding factors. For example,
nipple trauma appearing to be a cause of mastitis likely
represents an association rather than a causation. Nipple
trauma is extremely frequent in hyperlactation, which is a risk
factor for mastitis. Future studies should carefully control for
potential confounding factors as well as explore diverse
cultures and practices throughout the world. In addition,
higher quality studies are needed to determine precise rec-
ommendations regarding antibiotics as the presence of even
small quantities of antibiotics in human milk alters the
diversity and resilience of the human milk microbiome.73
Because antibiotics are often prescribed through telephone
triage in many countries, studies to clarify prevalence of
bacterial mastitis as opposed to engorgement and/or inﬂam-
matory mastitis are necessary. The use of probiotics warrants
further research as well. As women in the peripartum period
are at their lifetime highest risk for developing an anxiety or
mood disorder, the distinction between symptoms of mood
and anxiety disorders versus mastitis should also be explored.
Disclosure Statement
J.M.R. has been the PI of research projects and clinical
assays funded by Puleva/Biosearch Life (Granada, Spain) or
Nutricia (Utrecht, The Netherlands), involving the charac-
terization, safety, and efﬁcacy of probiotic strains for the
mastitis target. He and his research group have never received
any payment or royalty related to the commercialization of
probiotic strains.
Funding Information
No funding was received for this article.
References
1. Wilson E, Woodd SL, Benova L. Incidence of and risk
factors for lactational mastitis: A systematic review. J Hum
Lact 2020;36:673–686.
2. Kvist LJ. Toward a clariﬁcation of the concept of mastitis
as used in empirical studies of breast inﬂammation during
lactation. J Hum Lact 2010;26:53–59.
3. Johnson HM, Eglash A, Mitchell KB, et al. ABM clinical
protocol #32: Management of hyperlactation. Breastfeed
Med 2020;15:129–134.
4. Bartick M, Herna´ndez-Aguilar MT, Wight N, et al. ABM
clinical protocol #35: Supporting breastfeeding during mater-
nal or child hospitalization. Breastfeed Med 2021;16:664–674.
5. Jimenez E, Arroyo R, Cardenas N, et al. Mammary can-
didiasis: A medical condition without scientiﬁc evidence?
PLoS One 2017;12:e0181071.
6. Ferna´ndez L, Pannaraj PS, Rautava S, et al. The microbiota
of the human mammary ecosystem. Front Cell Infect
Microbiol 2020;10:586667.
7. Weaver SR, Hernandez LL. Autocrine-paracrine regulation
of the mammary gland. J Dairy Sci 2016;99:842–853.
8. Hill PD, Humenick SS. The occurrence of breast en-
gorgement. J Hum Lact 1994;10:79–86.
9. Scott JA, Binns CW, Oddy WH. Predictors of delayed
onset of lactation. Matern Child Nutr 2007;3:186–193.
10. Ramsay DT, Kent JC, Hartmann RA, et al. Anatomy of the
lactating human breast redeﬁned with ultrasound imaging.
J Anat 2005;206:525–534.
11. Betts RC, Johnson HM, Eglash A, et al. It’s not yeast: Ret-
rospective cohort study of lactating women with persistent
nipple and breast pain. Breastfeed Med 2021;16:318–324.
12. Kim SY, Yi DY. Analysis of the human breast milk mi-
crobiome and bacterial extracellular vesicles in healthy
mothers. Exp Mol Med 2020;52:1288–1297.
13. Evans AS. Causation and disease: The Henle-Koch postu-
lates revisited. Yale J Biol Med 1976;49:175–195.
14. Johnson HM, Mitchell KB. Lactational phlegmon: A dis-
tinct clinical entity affecting breastfeeding women within
the mastitis-abscess spectrum. Breast J 2019;doi:10.1111/
tbj.13624
15. Amir LH, Forster D, McLachlan H, et al. Incidence of
breast abscess in lactating women: Report from an Aus-
tralian cohort. BJOG 2004;111:1378–1381.
16. Patani N, MacAskill F, Eshelby S, et al. Best-practice care
pathway for improving management of mastitis and breast
abscess. Br J Surg 2018;105:1615–1622.
17. Lepori D. Inﬂammatory breast disease: The radiologist’s
role. Diagn Interv Imaging 2015;96:1045–1064.
18. Sabate JM, Clotet M, Torrubia S, et al. Radiologic evalu-
ation of breast disorders related to pregnancy and lactation.
Radiographics 2007;27 Suppl 1:S101–S124.
19. Jime´nez E, de Andre´s J, Manrique M, et al. Metagenomic
analysis of milk of healthy and mastitis-suffering women.
J Hum Lact 2015;31:406–415.
20. Patel SH, Vaidya YH, Patel RJ, et al. Culture independent
assessment of human milk microbial community in lacta-
tional mastitis. Sci Rep 2017;7:7804.
21. Rodrı´guez J, Ferna´ndez L. Infectious mastitis during lac-
tation: A mammary dysbiosis model. In: Prebiotics and
Probiotics in Human Milk, McGuire M, McGuire M, Bode
L, eds. London: Academic Press, 2017, pp. 401–428.
22. Mitchell KB, Johnson HM. Breast pathology that contrib-
utes to dysfunction of human lactation: A spotlight on
nipple blebs. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia 2020;25:
79–83.
23. Berens P, Eglash A, Malloy M, et al. ABM clinical protocol
#26: Persistent pain with breastfeeding. Breastfeed Med
2016;11:46–53.
374
ABM PROTOCOL


===== PAGE 16 =====
24. Ebell MH, Siwek J, Weiss BD, et al. Strength of recom-
mendation taxonomy (SORT): A patient-centered approach
to grading evidence in the medical literature. J Am Board
Fam Pract 2004;17:59–67.
25. Kvist
LJ,
Hall-Lord
ML,
Rydhstroem
H,
et
al.
A randomised-controlled trial in Sweden of acupuncture
and care interventions for the relief of inﬂammatory
symptoms of the breast during lactation. Midwifery 2007;
23:184–195.
26. ACOG committee opinion no. 736: Optimizing postpartum
care. Obstet Gynecol 2018;131:e140-e150.
27. Kuehnl JM, Connelly MK, Dzidic A, et al. The effects of
incomplete milking and increased milking frequency on
milk production rate and milk composition1. J Anim Sci
2019;97:2424–2432.
28. McKechnie AC, Eglash A. Nipple shields: A review of the
literature. Breastfeed Med 2010;5:309–314.
29. Anderson L, Kynoch K, Kildea S, et al. Effectiveness of
breast massage for the treatment of women with breast-
feeding problems: A systematic review. JBI Database
System Rev Implement Rep 2019;17:1668–1694.
30. Witt AM, Bolman M, Kredit S, et al. Therapeutic breast
massage in lactation for the management of engorgement,
plugged ducts, and mastitis. J Hum Lact 2016;32:123–131.
31. Ezzo J, Manheimer E, McNeely ML, et al. Manual lym-
phatic drainage for lymphedema following breast cancer
treatment. Cochrane Database Syst Rev 2015;CD003475.
32. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed). Bethesda, MD:
National Library of Medicine (US), 2006. Castor. Updated
2021. Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/
NBK501875 (accessed March 5, 2022).
33. Dabiri G, Damstetter E, Phillips T. Choosing a wound
dressing based on common wound characteristics. Adv
Wound Care (New Rochelle) 2016;5:32–41.
34. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. How to clean
your breast pump kit clean: The essentials. Updated 2020.
Available
at
https://www.cdc.gov/healthywater/hygiene/
healthychildcare/infantfeeding/breastpump.html
(accessed
September 1, 2021).
35. Stone K, Wheeler A. A review of anatomy, physiology, and
benign pathology of the nipple. Ann Surg Oncol 2015;22:
3236–3240.
36. Martin E, Vickers B, Landau R, et al. ABM clinical pro-
tocol #28, peripartum analgesia and anesthesia for the
breastfeeding mother. Breastfeed Med 2018;13:164–171.
37. Bushra R, Aslam N. An overview of clinical pharmacology
of Ibuprofen. Oman Med J 2010;25:155–1661.
38. Freo U, Ruocco C, Valerio A, et al. Paracetamol: A review
of guideline recommendations. J Clin Med 2021;10:3420.
39. Wessinger L, Marotta R, Kelechi TJ. Hot or cold? Treating
cellulitis. Nursing 2011;41:46–48.
40. Chan MM, Nohara M, Chan BR, et al. Lecithin decreases
human milk fat loss during enteral pumping. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr 2003;36:613–615.
41. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed). Bethesda, MD:
National Library of Medicine (US), 2006. Triamcinolone,
topical. Updated 2021. Available at https://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/books/NBK501123/
(accessed
September
27,
2021).
42. Mogensen N, Portman A, Mitchell K. Nonpharmacologic
approaches to pain, engorgement, and plugging in lacta-
tion: Applying physical therapy techniques from breast
cancer care to breastfeeding patients. Clin Lact 2020;11:
35–42.
43. Cooper B, Kowalsky D. Physical therapy intervention for
treatment of blocked milk ducts in lactating women.
J Womens Health Phys Ther 2015;39:115–126.
44. Crepinsek MA, Taylor EA, Michener K, et al. Interventions
for preventing mastitis after childbirth. Cochrane Database
Syst Rev 2020;9:CD007239.
45. Oikonomou G, Addis MF, Chassard C. Milk microbiota:
What are we exactly talking about? Front Microbiol 2020;
11:60.
46. Amir LH, Grifﬁn L, Cullinane M, et al. Probiotics and
mastitis: Evidence-based marketing? Int Breastfeed J 2016;
11:19.
47. Barker M, Adelson P, Peters MDJ, et al. Probiotics and
human lactational mastitis: A scoping review. Women Birth
2020;33:e483–e491.
48. Ferna´ndez L, Ca´rdenas N, Arroyo R, et al. Prevention of
infectious mastitis by oral administration of lactobacillus
salivarius PS2 during late pregnancy. Clin Infect Dis 2016;
62:568–573.
49. Hurtado JA, Fonolla´ J. Response to Paricio-Talayero and
Baeza re: ‘‘Oral administration to nursing women of lac-
tobacillus
fermentum
CECT5716
prevents
lactational
mastitis development: A randomized controlled trial’’.
Breastfeed Med 2018;13:454–456.
50. Dagla M, Dagla C, Mrvoljak-Theodoropoulou I, et al. Do
maternal stress and depressive symptoms in perinatal pe-
riod predict the lactation mastitis occurrence? A retro-
spective longitudinal study in Greek women. Diagnostics
(Basel) 2021;11:1524.
51. Urits I, Peck J, Orhurhu MS, et al. Off-label antidepressant
use for treatment and management of chronic pain: Evol-
ving understanding and comprehensive review. Curr Pain
Headache Rep 2019;23:66.
52. Morns MA, Steel AE, Burns E, et al. Women who
experience feelings of aversion while breastfeeding: A
meta-ethnographic review. Women Birth 2021;34:128–
135.
53. Kujawa-Myles S, Noel-Weiss J, Dunn S, et al. Maternal
intravenous ﬂuids and postpartum breast changes: A pilot
observational study. Int Breastfeed J 2015;10:18.
54. World Health Organization. Guideline: Protecting, Pro-
moting, and Supporting Breastfeeding in Facilities: Pro-
viding Maternity and Newborn Services. Geneva: World
Health Organization, 2017.
55. Becker GE, Cooney F, Smith HA. Methods of milk
expression for lactating women. Cochrane Database Syst
Rev 2011;CD006170. DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD006170
.pub3.
56. Cotterman KJ. Reverse pressure softening: A simple tool to
prepare areola for easier latching during engorgement.
J Hum Lact 2004;20:227–237.
57. Zakarija-Grkovic I, Stewart F. Treatments for breast en-
gorgement during lactation. Cochrane Database Syst Rev
2020;9:CD006946.
58. WHO. Mastitis: Causes and Management. Publication No.
WHO/FCH/CAH/00.13. 2000.
59. Trop I, Dugas A, David J, et al. Breast abscesses: Evidence-
based algorithms for diagnosis, management, and follow-
up. Radiographics 2011;31:1683–1699.
60. Dixon JM. Repeated aspiration of breast abscesses in lac-
tating women. Br Med J 1988;297:1517–1518.
61. Ulitzsch D, Nyman MKG, Carlson RA. Breast abscess in
lactating women: US-guided treatment. Radiology 2004;
232:904–909.
ABM PROTOCOL
375


===== PAGE 17 =====
62. Christensen
AF,
Al-Suliman
N,
Nielson
KR,
et
al.
Ultrasound-guided drainage of breast abscesses: Results in
151 patients. Br J Radiol 2005;78:186–188.
63. Mitchell K. In-ofﬁce drainage of lactational abscesses:
Utilization of stab incision and penrose drain. Presented at
the American Society of Breast Surgeons 22nd Annual
Meeting, April 30, 2021.
64. Kornfeld H, Johnson A, Soares M, et al. Management of
infected galactocele and breast implant with uninterrupted
breastfeeding. Plast Reconstr Surg Glob Open 2021;9:
e3943.
65. Johnson HM, Mitchell KB. Low incidence of milk ﬁstula
with continued breastfeeding following radiologic and
surgical interventions on the lactating breast. Breast Dis
2021;40:183–189.
66. Ghosh K, Morton MJ, Whaley DH, et al. Infected galac-
tocele: A perplexing problem. Breast J 2004;10:159.
67. Arroyo R, Martı´n V, Maldonado A, et al. Treatment of
infectious mastitis during lactation: Antibiotics versus oral
administration of lactobacilli isolated from breast milk.
Clin Infect Dis 2010;50:1551–1558.
68. Mitchell KB, Johnson HM, Eglash A. ABM clinical pro-
tocol #30: Breast masses, breast complaints, and diagnostic
breast imaging in the lactating woman. Breastfeed Med
2019;14:208–214.
69. Dawood S, Merajver SD, Viens P, et al. International expert
panel on inﬂammatory breast cancer: Consensus statement
for standardized diagnosis and treatment. Ann Oncol 2011;
22:515–523.
70. Anderson PO. Drugs in lactation. Pharm Res 2018;35:45.
71. Geng N, Liu K, Lu J, et al. Autophagy of bovine mammary
epithelial cell induced by intracellular Staphylococcus au-
reus. J Microbiol 2020;58:320–329.
72. Parnham MJ, Erakovic Haber V, Giamarellos-Bourboulis
EJ, et al. Azithromycin: Mechanisms of action and their
relevance for clinical applications. Pharmacol Ther 2014;
143:225–245.
73. Soto A, Martin V, Jimenez E, et al. Lactobacilli and biﬁ-
dobacteria in human breast milk: Inﬂuence of anti-
biotherapy and other host and clinical factors. J Pediatr
Gastroenterol Nutr 2014;59:78–88.
74. Mitchell K, Johnson H. Breast conditions in the breast-
feeding mother. In: Breastfeeding: A Guide for the Medical
Profession, 9 ed., Lawrence R, Lawrence R, eds. Elsevier,
2021, pp. 572–593.
75. Nauta EH, Mattie H. Dicloxacillin and cloxacillin: Phar-
macokinetics in healthy and hemodialysis subjects. Clin
Pharmacol Ther 1976;20:98–108.
76. Hale T. Hale’s Medications & Mother’s Milk: A Manual of
Lactational Pharmacology, 19th ed. New York, NY: Springer,
2021.
77. Drugs and Lactation Database (LactMed). Bethesda, MD:
National Library of Medicine (US), 2006. Trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole. Updated 2021. Available at https://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK501289/
(accessed
September 2, 2021).
ABM protocols expire in 5 years from the date of publica-
tion. Content of this protocol is up to date at the time of pub-
lication. Evidence-based revisions are made within 5 years or
sooner if there are signiﬁcant changes in the evidence.
Katrina B. Mitchell, MD, FACS, lead author
Helen M. Johnson, MD
Juan Miguel Rodrı´guez, PhD
Anne Eglash, MD, FABM
Charlotte Scherzinger, MD
Irena Zakarija-Grkovic, MD, FRACGP, PhD, FABM
Kyle Widmer Cash, MD
Pamela Berens, MD, FACOG, FABM
Brooke Miller, MD, CCFP
The Academy of Breastfeeding Medicine Protocol
Committee Members:
Elizabeth Stehel, MD, Chair
Lawrence Noble, MD, FABM, Translations Chair
Melissa C. Bartick, MD, MS, FABM
Sarah Calhoun, MD
Laura Kair, MD, MAS, FABM
Susan Lappin, MD, FABM
Ilse Larson, MD
Yvonne LeFort, MD, FABM
Nicole Marshall, MD, MCR
Katrina B. Mitchell, MD
Susan Rothenberg, MD, FABM
Tomoko Seo, MD, FABM
Gina Weissman, DMD
Nancy Wight, MD, FABM
Lori Feldman-Winter, MD, MPH
Adora Okogbule-Wonodi, MD
Michal Young, MD, FABM
Deena Zimmerman, MD, MPH
For correspondence: abm@bfmed.org
376
ABM PROTOCOL
